Hello, hello hello, and welcome to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about a lesser-known,
much darker side of British culture.
One that has plagued Britain for
decades, and earned a reputation
abroad as the ‘British disease’.
It’s the ugly side of the beautiful
game, football hooliganism,
the British phenomenon of
fighting at football matches.
Okay then, let’s get into it and talk
about the history of football hooliganism.
On the far side of the stadium, the
crowd writhes around in the distance.
The air is filled with panicked
screams and shouts, the smell of
beer, urine, and tobacco smoke.
A plastic chair flies over your
head, followed by bottles and bricks.
Slowly, supporters from the far side
of the stadium close in, and you watch
as they fight with police on the pitch.
The police strike back with batons,
and the approaching fans throw bottles
and coins, punching and kicking
anything, and anyone, in their way.
There are screams of fear and rage,
and chaos as people climb over
one another to try and escape.
Some are knocked unconscious, face
down on the pitch, someone grabs you by
the arm, telling you it’s time to go.
It is 1985.
You’re at a football stadium in
England, and you are watching
the ‘British disease’ in action.
So, how did this bizarre
British subculture develop?
How could such an ugly tradition stem
from what billions of people the world
over know as the ‘beautiful game’?
As always, we need to delve
into a bit of history.
But don’t worry, for the non-football fans
among us, we won’t be going back and doing
a blow-by-blow history of football, and
the next 20 minutes should be interesting,
whether you are a die-hard football fan
or you've never watched a game before.
Football fan or not, as I’m sure you'll
know, in many parts of the world - and
almost every single city, town and
village in Britain - football clubs
have a religious, cult-like following.
They are often much more than a
sporting club, they are pillars of
the community that reflect local
history, politics, and religion.
For some, this is an
attachment worth fighting for.
So, how did football hooliganism start?
When were the first punches thrown?
Well, as you may know, from the Chinese
to the Aztecs to the Ancient Greeks,
many countries and civilisations
claim to have “invented” football.
The British claim comes from the
12th century, and even from the
start it was a violent sport.
It wasn’t an organised game with
rules and positions, and matches
weren’t played in stadiums.
Instead, “football” was played between
two different villages, and played not
with a ball but a stuffed pig’s bladder.
And the aim of the game wasn’t to kick
the ball, or rather, the pig’s bladder,
in the opposing team’s goal, but to kick
it across a heath - or field - in the
direction of the other village’s church.
Unlike the pampered football stars
of today, 12th century football was
an incredibly violent, lawless game.
There were no referees, and people
would do anything they could to
stop the ball, the pig’s bladder,
from heading in the wrong direction.
People were even killed during matches.
It was so violent that in 1349,
King Edward III banned football
due to the violent rivalries and
mob mentality it was creating.
The King also felt that football
had developed a cult-like following
that distracted people from their
civic and military responsibilities.
As the sport developed over the next
few centuries and rules were added,
clubs and leagues formed, and matches
started to be played on pitches.
But one thing remained a part of the game
both on  and off the pitch: violence.
Football historians believe that the
first recorded case of hooliganism in
modern football was at an 1885 match
between Preston North End and Aston
Villa - two of England’s oldest clubs.
On that day the supporters, who were
described in newspapers at the time as
‘howling roughs’, decided to do something
known in British dialect as ‘kick off’.
And this is an interesting example of an
expression that’s a noun and a phrasal
verb with two very different meanings.
“Kick off” as a noun is the start of a
football match, but if you use it as a
verb, “to kick off”, it can mean to kick
off a match, to start a match, but it can
also mean to erupt in violent behaviour.
And it is this type of kicking
off that happened in 1885.
After Preston North End went 5-0 up
against Aston Villa, the fans went mad,
attacking the players from both teams,
spitting on them, punching and kicking
them, and attacking them with sticks
and stones, so much so that one of the
Preston players was knocked unconscious.
And then the next year, in 1886, the
Preston North End fans would become the
first to do something that would go on
to become a common hooligan tactic in
later years - fighting in a train station.
It was around this time, in the
1890s, that historians believe that
the term ‘hooligan’ was coined, or
first used, after a man named Patrick
Hooligan killed a London policeman.
Anyway, back to the hooligans themselves.
And it’s back to the Preston North End
supporters again, when in 1905 a group
of supporters were tried in court for the
crime of being a hooligan when they kicked
off after a match with Blackburn Rovers.
Interestingly enough, the reports of
this group of hooligans included a
"drunk and disorderly" 70-year-old woman.
As you will probably know, most football
hooligans aren’t 70-year-old women,
football hooliganism is an overwhelmingly
- almost entirely - young, male thing to do.
In fact, the demographics
are even narrower than that.
Football hooliganism is very much a
white, male, working-class subculture
And it’s clearly a young man’s activity
too, with one report finding that the
vast majority of football hooligans in
the UK are between 25 to 44 years old.
So, why are these football fans fighting?
Well, sometimes the rivalries
go a lot deeper than simply
not liking another team.
For one example of this
we can go to Scotland.
Specifically, to Glasgow in 1909.
If you’re a football fan, you’ll
know that there are two main football
teams in Glasgow: Rangers, and Celtic.
The match between the two clubs
is called the “Old Firm” derby,
and it’s one of world football’s
fiercest and most violent rivalries.
And the ‘Old Firm’, the match
between Rangers and Celtics, is
about much more than football.
It represents religious, political and
transnational divisions at the core of
British - and Irish - society and history.
As you might know, Celtic fans are
traditionally Catholics, of Irish
descent, and sympathetic to Irish
republicanism, whereas Rangers fans are
Protestant, and, at least traditionally,
supportive of the United Kingdom.
Celtic fans wave Irish flags at
matches, sing pro-Irish republican and
anti-British songs, and the Rangers fans
fly British flags and sing provocative
anti-Irish and anti-Catholic songs.
These derbies are always violent
events, but back in 1909 the ‘Old Firm’
derby ended in a mass riot that lasted
for two hours and resulted in the
serious injury of over 50 policemen.
So, as you can see, at the turn
of the 20th century, football
matches were violent places.
And this violence showed no signs
of abating, of slowing down.
The First and Second World Wars, however,
and the years between them, provided
a bit of respite, a bit of peace.
Not only did the country have more
pressing matters to deal with, but young
men presumably realised that people from
other towns and cities weren’t so bad.
So, violence at matches
started to decrease.
But then the Second World War ended
and British society was flooded
with former soldiers - many of them
unemployed, many of them traumatised
with what would today be called Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder - and football
hooliganism had a bit of revival.
In the 1955-56 season, fans from another
of the British game’s biggest local
rivalries, Liverpool and  Everton, were
involved in a number of ‘train-wrecking
incidents’ where fans vandalised
and destroyed train carriages.
In fact, the post-war expansion of
Britain’s transport networks - both the
rebuilding of its railways but also the
increasing number of national motorways
and cars - allowed football hooligans
to travel more easily on ‘away days’.
In case you weren’t aware, like in pretty
much every football league, in the British
football leagues, teams play at their home
stadium, but they also travel to other
towns and cities to play other clubs.
By the time the 1960s came around
there were an average of 25 serious
hooligan incidents a year, and football
hooliganism was beginning to embed
itself into British sporting life.
Whereas in the past football violence
had been more sporadic, or random, in the
1960s, and in the 1970s, football violence
became more organised and habitual.
It was around this time that
hooligans began to organise
themselves into gangs known as
‘firms’ with hierarchies and members.
And unlike in the United States, where
the sheer size of the country and
its franchise system means it’s rare
for fans to travel to support their
teams, in Britain this became the norm.
Each weekend, thousands of fans
would travel the length and breadth
of the country on Britain’s railways
to support, to cheer on, their club.
For many, they travelled not only
to support their club, but to fight.
For some, that was the
only reason they went.
It almost goes without saying, but
alcohol - and often cocaine - played a
huge role in fuelling football violence.
Often on matchdays, supporters would
begin drinking in the early morning as
they set off on their long journeys.
In fact, special train services - known
as ‘Football specials’ - were put on
to transport fans across the country.
These journeys, known as ‘away days’,
became a huge part of hooligan culture.
And from the 1970s onwards, firms began
to give themselves their own names.
Some of the most famous football firms
emerged around this time, including the
Leeds United ‘Service Crew’, Chelsea
‘Headhunters’, West Ham’s ‘Intercity
Firm’ - which was named after the
train line they travelled on - as well
as the Millwall ‘Bushwhackers’ and
Birmingham City’s ‘Zulu Warriors.’
And when I say these firms were
becoming more organised, I don’t
just mean among themselves.
A key part of football hooligan culture
is the cooperation between rival
firms to set up and organise fights.
So, in preparation for an ‘away day’,
one of the more senior members of
the firm - often known as the ‘top
boy’ - will set up the fight with the
leader of another team’s firm by phone.
They arrange a time and place, sometimes
at the stadium but often further afield to
avoid the eyes of the police, who by the
1970s were beginning to take the problem
of football violence more seriously.
And it was around this time
that the very ‘British disease’
began to spread across Europe.
Hooligan groups started forming
in other European countries.
And though there were clear similarities
with the hooligans of British
football, each club and country
developed its own style and identity.
Hooliganism became particularly popular
in Italy, where its ‘ultra’ fans were
aligned to fascist politics, but also
in Germany, Holland, and further afield
in places like Turkey and Russia.
And not only did the disease of
hooliganism cross borders, but the
hooligans and firms themselves too, as
fans began travelling internationally and
crossing borders for European matches.
On their European travels in the
late-1970s, many British hooligans
picked up on continental sportswear
and began incorporating it into their
own fashion sense - a style that
became known as ‘football casual’.
This served two purposes.
Firstly, to show off their expensive
designer European brands to their rivals.
But it was also camouflage.
It was “casual” in the sense that
firms stopped wearing traditional team
colours because it was easier to blend
in, to avoid the police, and infiltrate
rival club’s stadiums and pubs.
It was during this period, in the
1970s moving into the 1980s, that
was the high point [or perhaps, low
point] of football hooligan activity.
In a 1985 FA cup fixture between
Luton and Millwall, for example,
31 fans were arrested after
violence left 81 people injured.
Fans rioted, ripped out stadium
seats and attacked policemen.
A knife was thrown at a player,
and a “Football Special” train
had its ceiling ripped off.
After the riot, a British Rail spokesman
said that "it was like a bomb had
exploded inside some of the carriages."
Unfortunately during this period,
political instability in British society
meant that far-right politics began
intermingling with football violence.
Fascist groups such as the National
Front began infiltrating and
appealing to hooligan firms, and
there was a huge amount of racist
abuse towards black players.
Fascist political literature was sold
outside stadiums, racism at football
matches became rampant, and although
the number of active National Front
members involved in organised football
violence is perhaps overstated, it wasn’t
as large as people said it was, they
were certainly a very loud and visible
element of football casual culture.
The 1980s also saw some of the
deadliest episodes of football
violence that would have far-reaching
consequences on hooligan culture.
The Heysel Stadium disaster, in Belgium,
on the 29th of May, 1985, was one of them.
It happened at the European Cup
Final between Liverpool and Juventus,
and was a tragedy that killed
39 people and left 400 injured.
After being attacked at a match in
Rome the previous year, Liverpool
hooligans saw Heysel as an opportunity
for revenge against the Italians
and they managed to break into the
Juventus’ section of the stadium.
As the Juventus fans fled, a
wall collapsed and crushed 39
people - mostly Italians - to death.
As a result of the tragedy, all English
football clubs were banned indefinitely
from playing in European competition, and
fourteen Liverpool fans were found guilty
of manslaughter, of accidental murder.
This ‘British disease’ had spread
to Europe with deadly consequences.
Then, a few years later, another incident
synonymous with football hooliganism
- but unjustly so, as I will explain in
a minute - happened in Sheffield, which
is a city in the north of England.
In 1989, 96 Liverpool fans were crushed
to death at Hillsborough Stadium during
an FA Cup semi-final fixture between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
It was the deadliest event in British
sporting history, and the police
and British media [and much of the
general public, it must be said] were
quick to blame the Liverpool fans.
With memories of Heysel still fresh in
people’s minds, the Liverpool fans were
painted as violent hooligans and drunks.
For years the British police,
public, and press all cited the
Hillsborough disaster as yet another
example of the deadly consequences
of Britain's hooligan culture.
But in reality, it wasn’t
actually that simple.
After years of investigations and
inquiries, it was revealed that poor
policing, particularly crowd management,
caused the crush, and that hooliganism
had not been a factor in the tragedy.
The Hillsborough disaster, however,
did indirectly contribute to a
decrease in football hooliganism.
After the disaster, a number of safety
improvements were made in English
football stadiums, most notably
the replacement of fenced standing
terraces with fully seated-stadiums.
Essentially, there was a
seat for every spectator.
This not only made football stadiums
safer, but also made it easier to
separate rival fans, which is clearly
a good thing if you want to stop
people from fighting each other.
Unsurprisingly, after the disasters
at Heysel and Hillsborough, and
the growing football violence
during the 1980s more widely, there
was a crackdown on hooliganism.
There was an increased police presence
at matches, and longer prison sentences
given for those convicted of hooliganism.
By this point, fewer football clubs,
and fewer fans, were suffering
from this “British Disease”,
and in the 1990s violence at
football matches started to drop.
Not only was there more CCTV, and harsher
punishments if you were caught, but
the generation of hooligans from the
‘heyday’ of the 1980s was growing older.
What’s more, this crackdown also came as
the sport was becoming professionalised
and commercialised - as Britain’s
Premier League was established and
became an international television
product, the game was cleaned up.
At last, football matches were
becoming less violent places.
And if you go to a British football
game today, you probably won’t see any
signs of the hooligans of the past.
But at least you’ll know, if you
didn’t before, that football in
Britain has a violent history.
Whether it be the brutal clashes
between villages in the 12th century,
the emergence of hooliganism in the
late-19th century, sectarian riots
in Glasgow; or the highly-organised,
ultra-violent hooliganism of the
1970s and 1980s, British football
was often more like war than sport.
The firms.
The clothes.
The chants.
The alcohol.
The danger.
The away days.
The violence.
And sometimes, the death.
There was a very good reason it
was called “The British Disease”.
Ok then, that is it for today’s episode
on football hooliganism in Britain,
the ugly side of the beautiful game.
I hope it was an interesting one, and
whether you knew a lot about football
hooliganism before, or this was the
first time you’d heard anything about it,
well I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Did you know much about British
football hooliganism before today?
Are there football
hooligans in your country?
Is going to a football match considered
a safe or dangerous thing in your city?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.